<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Kabok the Prophet</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="kabok-the-prophet" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Kabok the Prophet</h2>
			<p>When Alhireth-Hotep was among the Things that Were, and still men sought to know, they said unto Kabok: "Be thou as wise as was Alhireth-Hotep."</p>
			<p>And Kabok grew wise in his own sight and in the sight of men.</p>
			<p>And Kabok said: "Mung maketh his signs against men or withholdeth it by the advice of Kabok."</p>
			<p>And he said unto one: "Thou hast sinned against Kabok, therefore will Mung make the sign of Mung against thee." And to another: "Thou has brought Kabok gifts, therefore shall Mung forbear to make against thee the sign of Mung."</p>
			<p>One night as Kabok fattened upon the gifts that men had brought him he heard the tread of Mung treading in the garden of Kabok about his house at night.</p>
			<p>And because the night was very still it seemed most evil to Kabok that Mung should be treading in his garden, without the advice of Kabok, about his house at night.</p>
			<p>And Kabok, who knew All Things, grew afraid, for the treading was very loud and the night still, and he knew not what lay behind the back of Mung, which none had ever seen.</p>
			<p>But when the morning grew to brightness, and there was light upon the Worlds, and Mung trod no longer in the garden, Kabok forgot his fears, and said: "Perhaps it was but a herd of cattle that stampeded in the garden of Kabok."</p>
			<p>And Kabok went about his business, which was that of knowing All<br/> Things, and telling All Things unto men, and making light of Mung.<br/> </p>
			<p>But that night Mung trod again in the garden of Kabok, about his house at night, and stood before the window of the house like a shadow standing erect, so that Kabok knew indeed that it was Mung.</p>
			<p>And a great fear fell upon the throat of Kabok, so that his speech was hoarse; and he cried out: "Thou art Mung!"</p>
			<p>And Mung slightly inclined his head, and went on to tread in the garden of Kabok, about his house at night.</p>
			<p>And Kabok lay and listened with horror at his heart.</p>
			<p>But when the second morning grew to brightness, and there was light upon the Worlds, Mung went from treading in the garden of Kabok; and for a little while Kabok hoped, but looked with great dread for the coming of the third night.</p>
			<p>And when the third night was come, and the bat had gone to his home, and the wind had sank, the night was very still.</p>
			<p>And Kabok lay and listened, to whom the wings of the night flew very slow.</p>
			<p>But, ere night met the morning upon the highway between Pegana and the Worlds, there came the tread of Mung in the garden of Kabok towards Kabok's door.</p>
			<p>And Kabok fled out of his house as flees a hunted beast and flung himself before Mung.</p>
			<p>And Mung made the sign of Mung, pointing towards THE END.</p>
			<p>And the fears of Kabok had rest from troubling Kabok any more, for they and he were among accomplished things.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
