<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Of Dorozhand</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="of-dorozhand" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Of Dorozhand</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">(Whose Eyes Regard the End)</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Sitting above the lives of the people, and looking, doth Dorozhand see that which is to be.</p>
			<p>The god of Destiny is Dorozhand. Upon whom have looked the eyes of Dorozhand he goeth forward to an end that naught may stay; he becometh the arrow from the bow of Dorozhand hurled forward at a mark he may not see⁠—to the goal of Dorozhand. Beyond the thinking of men, beyond the sight of all the other gods, regard the eyes of Dorozhand.</p>
			<p>He hath chosen his slaves. And them doth the destiny god drive onward where he will, who, knowing not whither nor even knowing why, feel only his scourge behind them or hear his cry before.</p>
			<p>There is something that Dorozhand would fain achieve, and, therefore, hath he set the people striving, with none to cease or rest in all the worlds. But the gods of Pegāna, speaking to the gods, say: “What is it that Dorozhand would fain achieve?”</p>
			<p>It hath been written and said that not only the destinies of men are the care of Dorozhand but that even the gods of Pegāna be not unconcerned by his will.</p>
			<p>All the gods of Pegāna have felt a fear, for they have seen a look in the eyes of Dorozhand that regardeth beyond the gods.</p>
			<p>The reason and purpose of the Worlds is that there should be Life upon the Worlds, and Life is the instrument of Dorozhand wherewith he would achieve his end.</p>
			<p>Therefore the Worlds go on, and the rivers run to the sea, and Life ariseth and flieth even in all the Worlds, and the gods of Pegāna do the work of the gods⁠—and all for Dorozhand. But when the end of Dorozhand hath been achieved there will be need no longer of Life upon the Worlds, nor any more a game for the small gods to play. Then will Kib tiptoe gently across Pegāna to the resting-place in Highest Pegāna of <b>Māna-Yood-Sushāī</b>, and touching reverently his hand, the hand that wrought the gods, say: “<b>Māna-Yood-Sushāī</b>, thou hast rested long.”</p>
			<p>And <b>Māna-Yood-Sushāī</b> shall say: “<em>Not so; for I have rested for but fifty aeons of the gods, each of them scarce more than ten million mortal years of the Worlds that ye have made.</em>”</p>
			<p>And then shall the gods be afraid when they find that <b>Māna</b> knoweth that they have made Worlds while he rested. And they shall answer: “Nay; but the Worlds came all of themselves.”</p>
			<p>Then <b>Māna-Yood-Sushāī</b>, as one who would have done with an irksome matter, will lightly wave his hand⁠—the hand that wrought the gods⁠—and there shall be gods no more.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>When there shall be three moons towards the north above the Star of the Abiding, three moons that neither wax nor wane but regard towards the North.</p>
			<p>Or when the comet ceaseth from his seeking and stands still, not any longer moving among the Worlds but tarrying as one who rests after the end of search, then shall arise from resting, because it is <b>the end</b>, the Greater One, who rested of old time, even <b>Māna-Yood-Sushāī</b>.</p>
			<p>Then shall the Times that were be Times no more; and it may be that the old, dead days shall return from beyond the Rim, and we who have wept for them shall see those days again, as one who, returning from long travel to his home, comes suddenly on dear, remembered things.</p>
			<p>For none shall know of <b>Māna</b> who hath rested for so long, whether he be a harsh or merciful god. It may be that he shall have mercy, and that these things shall be.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
