<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Of How Imbaun Became High Prophet in Aradec of All the Gods Save One</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="of-how-imbaun-became-high-prophet" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Of How Imbaun Became High Prophet in Aradec of All the Gods Save One</h2>
			<p>Imbaun was to be made High Prophet in Aradec, of All the Gods save<br/> One.<br/> </p>
			<p>From Ardra, Rhoodra, and the lands beyond came all High Prophets of the Earth to the Temple in Aradec of All the gods save One.</p>
			<p>And then they told Imbaun how The Secret of Things was upon the summit of the dome of the Hall of Night, but faintly writ, and in an unknown tongue.</p>
			<p>Midway in the night, between the setting and the rising sun, they led Imbaun into the Hall of Night, and said to him, chaunting altogether: "Imbaun, Imbaun, Imbaun, look up to the roof, where is writ The Secret of Things, but faintly, and in an unknown tongue."</p>
			<p>And Imbaun looked up, but darkness was so deep within the Hall of<br/> Night that Imbaun saw not even the High Prophets who came from<br/> Ardra, Rhoodra, and the lands beyond, nor saw he aught in the Hall<br/> of Night at all.<br/> </p>
			<p>Then called the High Prophets: "What seest thou, Imbaun?"</p>
			<p>And Imbaun said: "I see naught."</p>
			<p>Then called the High Prophets: "What knowest thou Imbaun?"</p>
			<p>And Imbaun said: "I know naught."</p>
			<p>Then spake the High Prophet of Eld of All the gods save One, who is first on Earth of prophets: "O Imbaun! we have all looked upwards in the Hall of Night towards the secret of Things, and ever it was dark, and the Secret faint and in an unknown tongue. And now thou knowest what all High Prophets know."</p>
			<p>And Imbaun answered: "I know."</p>
			<p>So Imbaun became High Prophet in Aradec of All the gods save One, and prayed for all the people, who knew not that there was darkness in the Hall of Night or that the secret was writ faint and in an unknown tongue.</p>
			<p>These are the words of Imbaun that he wrote in a book that all the people might know:</p>
			<p>"In the twentieth night of the nine hundredth moon, as night came up the valley, I performed the mystic rites of each of the gods in the temple as is my wont, lest any of the gods should grow angry in the night and whelm us while we slept.</p>
			<p>"And as I uttered the last of certain secret words I fell asleep in the temple, for I was weary, with my head against the altar of Dorozhand. Then in the stillness, as I slept, there entered Dorozhand by the temple door in the guise of a man, and touched me on the shoulder, and I awoke.</p>
			<p>"But when I saw that his eyes shone blue and lit the whole of the temple I knew that he was a god though he came in mortal guise. And Dorozhand said: 'Prophet of Dorozhand, behold that the people may know.' And he showed me the paths of Sish stretching far down into the future time. Then he bade me arise and follow whither he pointed, speaking no words but commanding with his eyes.</p>
			<p>"Therefore upon the twentieth night of the nine hundredth moon I walked with Dorozhand adown the paths of Sish into the future time.</p>
			<p>"And ever beside the way did men slay men. And the sum of their slaying was greater than the slaying of the pestilence of any of the evils of the gods.</p>
			<p>"And cities arose and shed their houses in dust, and ever the desert returned again to its own, and covered over and hid the last of all that had troubled its repose.</p>
			<p>"And still men slew men.</p>
			<p>"And I came at last to a time when men set their yoke no longer upon beasts but made them beasts of iron.</p>
			<p>"And after that did men slay men with mists.</p>
			<p>"Then, because the slaying exceeded their desire, there came peace upon the world that was brought by the hand of the slayer, and men slew men no more.</p>
			<p>"And cities multiplied, and overthrew the desert and conquered its repose.</p>
			<p>"And suddenly I beheld that THE END was near, for there was a stirring above Pegana as of One who grows weary of resting, and I saw the hound Time crouch to spring, with his eyes upon the throats of the gods, shifting from throat to throat, and the drumming of Skarl grew faint.</p>
			<p>"And if a god may fear, it seemed that there was fear upon the face of Dorozhand, and he seized me by the hand and led me back along the paths of Time that I might not see THE END.</p>
			<p>"Then I saw cities rise out of the dust again and fall back into the desert whence they had arisen; and again I slept in the Temple of All the gods save One, with my head against the altar of Dorozhand.</p>
			<p>"Then again the Temple was alight, but not with light from the eyes of Dorozhand; only dawn came all blue out of the East and shone through the arches of the Temple. Then I awoke and performed the morning rites and mysteries of All the gods save One, lest any of the gods be angry in the day and take away the Sun.</p>
			<p>"And I knew that because I who had been so near to it had not beheld THE END that a man should never behold it or know the doom of the gods. This They have hidden."</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
