<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Of Skarl the Drummer</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="of-skarl-the-drummer" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Of Skarl the Drummer</h2>
			<p>When <b>Māna-Yood-Sushāī</b> had made the gods and Skarl, Skarl made a drum, and began to beat upon it that he might drum forever. Then because he was weary after the making of the gods, and because of the drumming of Skarl, did <b>Māna-Yood-Sushāī</b> grow drowsy and fall asleep.</p>
			<p>And there fell a hush upon the gods when they saw that <b>Māna</b> rested, and there was silence on Pegāna save for the drumming of Skarl. Skarl sitteth upon the mist before the feet of <b>Māna-Yood-Sushāī</b>, above the gods of Pegāna, and there he beateth his drum. Some say that the Worlds and the Suns are but the echoes of the drumming of Skarl, and others say that they be dreams that arise in the mind of <b>Māna</b> because of the drumming of Skarl, as one may dream whose rest is troubled by sound of song, but none knoweth, for who hath heard the voice of <b>Māna-Yood-Sushāī</b>, or who hath seen his drummer?</p>
			<p>Whether the season be winter or whether it be summer, whether it be morning among the worlds or whether it be night, Skarl still beateth his drum, for the purposes of the gods are not yet fulfilled. Sometimes the arm of Skarl grows weary; but still he beateth his drum, that the gods may do the work of the gods, and the worlds go on, for if he cease for an instant then <b>Māna-Yood-Sushāī</b> will start awake, and there will be worlds nor gods no more.</p>
			<p>But, when at the last the arm of Skarl shall cease to beat his drum, silence shall startle Pegāna like thunder in a cave, and <b>Māna-Yood-Sushāī</b> shall cease to rest.</p>
			<p>Then shall Skarl put his drum upon his back and walk forth into the void beyond the worlds, because it is <b>the end</b>, and the work of Skarl is over.</p>
			<p>There may arise some other god whom Skarl may serve, or it may be that he shall perish; but to Skarl it shall matter not, for he shall have done the work of Skarl.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
