<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Of the Making of the Worlds</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="of-the-making-of-the-worlds" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Of the Making of the Worlds</h2>
			<p>When MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI had made the gods there were only the gods, and They sat in the middle of Time, for there was as much Time before them as behind them, which having no end had neither a beginning.</p>
			<p>And Pegana was without heat or light or sound, save for the drumming of Skarl; moreover Pegana was The Middle of All, for there was below Pegana what there was above it, and there lay before it that which lay beyond.</p>
			<p>Then said the gods, making the signs of the gods and speaking with Their hands lest the silence of Pegana should blush; then said the gods to one another, speaking with Their hands; "Let Us make worlds to amuse Ourselves while MANA rests. Let Us make worlds and Life and Death, and colours in the sky; only let Us not break the silence upon Pegana."</p>
			<p>Then raising Their hands, each god according to his sign, They made the worlds and the suns, and put a light in the houses of the sky.</p>
			<p>Then said the gods: "Let Us make one to seek, to seek and never to find out concerning the wherefore of the making of the gods."</p>
			<p>And They made by the lifting of Their hands, each god according to his sign, the Bright One with the flaring tail to seek from the end of the Worlds to the end of them again, to return again after a hundred years.</p>
			<p>Man, when thou seest the comet, know that another seeketh besides thee nor ever findeth out.</p>
			<p>Then said the gods, still speaking with Their hands: "Let there be now a Watcher to regard."</p>
			<p>And They made the Moon, with his face wrinkled with many mountains and worn with a thousand valleys, to regard with pale eyes the games of the small gods, and to watch throughout the resting time of MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI; to watch, to regard all things, and be silent.</p>
			<p>Then said the gods: "Let Us make one to rest. One not to move among the moving. One not to seek like the comet, nor to go round like the worlds; to rest while MANA rests."</p>
			<p>And They made the Star of the Abiding and set it in the North.</p>
			<p>Man, when thou seest the Star of the Abiding to the North, know that one resteth as doth MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI, and know that somewhere among the Worlds is rest.</p>
			<p>Lastly the gods said: "We have made worlds and suns, and one to seek and another to regard, let Us now make one to wonder."</p>
			<p>And They made Earth to wonder, each god by the uplifting of his hand according to his sign.</p>
			<p>And Earth was.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
