<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Of the Game of the Gods</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="of-the-game-of-the-gods" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Of the Game of the Gods</h2>
			<p>A million years passed over the first game of the gods. And <b>Māna-Yood-Sushāī</b> still rested, still in the middle of Time, and the gods still played with Worlds. The Moon regarded, and the Bright One sought, and returned again to his seeking.</p>
			<p>Then Kib grew weary of the first game of the gods, and raised his hand in Pegāna, making the sign of Kib, and Earth became covered with beasts for Kib to play with.</p>
			<p>And Kib played with beasts.</p>
			<p>But the other gods said one to another, speaking with their hands: “What is it that Kib has done?”</p>
			<p>And They said to Kib: “What are these things that move upon The Earth yet move not in circles like the Worlds, that regard like the Moon and yet they do not shine?”</p>
			<p>And Kib said: “This is Life.”</p>
			<p>But the gods said one to another: “If Kib has thus made beasts he will in time make Men, and will endanger the Secret of the gods.”</p>
			<p>And Mung was jealous of the work of Kib, and sent down Death among the beasts, but could not stamp them out.</p>
			<p>A million years passed over the second game of the gods, and still it was the Middle of Time.</p>
			<p>And Kib grew weary of the second game, and raised his hand in the Middle of All, making the sign of Kib, and made Men: out of beasts he made them, and Earth was covered with Men.</p>
			<p>Then the gods feared greatly for the Secret of the gods, and set a veil between Man and his ignorance that he might not understand. And Mung was busy among Men.</p>
			<p>But when the other gods saw Kib playing his new game They came and played it too. And this They will play until <b>Māna</b> arises to rebuke Them, saying: “<em>What do ye playing with Worlds and Suns and Men and Life and Death?</em>” And They shall be ashamed of Their playing in the hour of the laughter of <b>Māna-Yood-Sushāī</b>.</p>
			<p>It was Kib who first broke the Silence of Pegāna, by speaking with his mouth like a man.</p>
			<p>And all the other gods were angry with Kib that he had spoken with his mouth.</p>
			<p>And there was no longer silence in Pegāna or the Worlds.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
