<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 19</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>YONATH THE PROPHET</h2>
			<p>Yonath was the first among prophets who uttered unto men.</p>
			<p>These are the words of Yonath, the first among all prophets:</p>
			<p>There be gods upon Pegana.</p>
			<p>Upon a night I slept. And in my sleep Pegana came very near. And<br/> Pegana was full of gods.<br/> </p>
			<p>I saw the gods beside me as one might see wonted things.</p>
			<p>Only I saw not MANA-YOOD-SUSHAI.</p>
			<p>And in that hour, in the hour of my sleep, I knew.</p>
			<p>And the end and the beginning of my knowing, and all of my knowing that there was, was this—that Man Knoweth Not.</p>
			<p>Seek thou to find at night the utter edge of the darkness, or seek to find the birthplace of the rainbow where he leapeth upward from the hills, only seek not concerning the wherefore of the making of the gods.</p>
			<p>The gods have set a brightness upon the farther side of the Things to Come that they may appear more felititous to men than the Things that Are.</p>
			<p>To the gods the Things to Come are but as the Things that Are, and nothing altereth in Pegana.</p>
			<p>The gods, although not merciful, are not ferocious gods. They are the destroyers of the Days that Were, but they set a glory about the Days to Be.</p>
			<p>Man must endure the Days that Are, but the gods have left him his ignorance as a solace.</p>
			<p>Seek not to know. Thy seeking will weary thee, and thou wilt return much worn, to rest at last about the place from whence thou settest out upon thy seeking.</p>
			<p>Seek not to know. Even I, Yonath, the oldest prophet, burdened with the wisdom of great years, and worn with seeking, know only that man knoweth not.</p>
			<p>Once I set out seeking to know all things. Now I know one thing only, and soon the Years will carry me away.</p>
			<p>The path of my seeking, that leadeth to seeking again, must be trodden by very many more, when Yonath is no longer even Yonath.</p>
			<p>Set not thy foot upon that path.</p>
			<p>Seek not to know.</p>
			<p>These be the Words of Yonath.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
